# 2020 day 01

The puzzle: https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/1

My Rust solution:
https://github.com/sourcefrog/adventofcode2020/blob/main/src/bin/dec01.rs

Part 1 is essentially: given a list of numbers in a file, find a pair of numbers
whose sum is 2020, and return their product. This seems like a fairly easy fit.

## Reading the input file

First, let's read the input. One of the strange things about J, although not too
hard to adapt to, is that the builtins all have names of just punctuation,
numbers, and in some cases single letters. To read a file is `1!:1` which means
calling the `!:` verb with the arguments `1` and `1`, which happen to mean "read
a file". It feels a bit like older computers where one might hardcode memory
locations or system call numbers...

       1!:1 'input/dec01.txt'
    |domain error
    |       1!:1'input/dec01.txt'

The argument to `1!:1` needs to be a "boxed" string: vaguely analogous to a
boxed object in Rust or Java. This is done by the `<` _box_ operator.

Another thing to learn about J: almost everything that we normally think of as
paired punctuation, like `{}[]<>` is not a pair, but a standalone operator. The
exception is parenthesis, which generally do act as the normal grouping
construct (although with at least one other use.)

Try again:

       1!:1 < 'input/dec01.txt'

In the J console/repl, user input is indented by 3 spaces, and output is
left-aligned.

## Parsing the input

Loading the file gives a string, of course. We want to break it on newlines,
then parse the decimal numbers into integers.

To break on lines we can use the `;.`
[_intervals_](https://code.jsoftware.com/wiki/Vocabulary/semidot1#dyadic)
_adverb_. "Adverb" here means that it modifies some other verb, and here we
could use the
[`".` _numbers_](https://code.jsoftware.com/wiki/Vocabulary/quotedot#dyadic)
verb, which parses strings into numbers.

`;.` also takes a right-side argument expressing how to split the input, and
`_2` (meaning "minus two") splits on the last element of the input string. In
this case the input is terminated by a newline, which is conveniently also how
we want to split it.

The expression `". ;._2` therefore comprises a compound verb that, given a
single argument on the right hand side, breaks it by newlines (assuming it has a
trailing newline) and then parses each line into a number. We can think of a
compound verb here as being a bit like a lambda. The lambda prints as its
definition:

       ". ;._2
    ".;._2

To read and parse the input therefore:

       (". ;._2) 1!:1 < 'input/dec01.txt'
    1973 1755 1601 1852 493 1905 1752 1946 1608 1438 1383 1281 1918 1125 1624 1802 1513 1574 1871 1831 1842 1869 1982 1027 1009 1020 1016 1336 1519 1721 1960 1889 1299 1355 1622 399 1919 1749 1709 1425 1789 1620 1071 1248 1786 1879 1208 1697 1643 1510 1578 115...

(I'm not sure at the moment why the parentheses are needed, but without them I
get a `rank error`.)

Let's save this to a variable. It's initially hard to type `=:` rather than the
Pascal/Go `:=`, but the reason is that `:` is a common suffix to operator
characters, and seems to suggest a kind of `double-prime` or `double-dot`
operator. (It's almost as if it was `=̈` and `=̇`, although J gives up on the
non-ASCII characters of APL.) So

       Input =: (". ;._2) 1!:1 < 'input/dec01.txt'

## Controlling valence of execution

I think I understand why we need the parentheses.

In J, every verb can be called with either one, or two, operands. The verb can
have completely different definitions depending whether it is used in the
monadic (one-operand) or _dyadic_ (two-operand) _valence_.

In this case, we want to call `!:` with only one (right) operand, the filename.

The parentheses ensure that it's seen as monadic and that J doesn't try to "eat"
further into the left. (This isn't intuitive to me, yet.)

Perhaps it's cleaner to express this as

       Input =: ". ;._2 (1!:1 < 'input/dec01.txt')
